Mike Nelson: Ecumenical. I will drink anything that's good.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So how are you going to get it down from 52 to 4?
Mike Nelson: This is the challenge.
Mike Nelson: Particularly because some of the 52 are probably no longer being made.
Mike Nelson: Or I can only sample them at the monastery.
Mike Nelson: But it's a good, you know, it's good to have a passion and a lifetime goal.
Jerry Michalski: Exactly.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Mike, do you have to become a monk? Are there beers that the monastery will only give to residents and not to visitors?
Mike Nelson: It used to be that way, I'm sure.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah.
Mike Nelson: There still are a few that you have to go to the monastery to buy.
Jerry Michalski: Well, this is….
Mike Nelson: going commercial.
Jerry Michalski: This is the beer-oriented start of the Open Global Mind Community Call for Thursday, August 28th.
Jerry Michalski: A 2025 welcome.
Alex Kladitis: If anybody's interested at some point, not today, But in…
Alex Kladitis: the iPhone came out in 07, so probably talking a couple of years. When the apps became a thing. I wanted to… to write an app
Alex Kladitis: So I proposed a side… I had a connection to one of the biggest CIDO manufacturers here in the UK,
Alex Kladitis: And I put a presentation together for an app.
Alex Kladitis: To allow, obviously, the brewery, let's call it, to connect to the people.
Alex Kladitis: but also had a whole load of features that were actually, I thought, quite interesting. They never went for it. I don't think anybody's ever written it, but I would fancy…
Alex Kladitis: It'd still be a pretty good one.
Mike Nelson: Untapped will allow you to rank the ciders that you drink as well, and they have…
Mike Nelson: Information on them, but the great thing about the app is you never have to drink substandard beer.
Mike Nelson: You show up at a bar in Nicaragua or Sri Lanka, and you can kind of go through the beer list and determine which ones are, you know, at least a 3.7.
Jerry Michalski: They should add a little feature where you can take a picture of the menu, and it'll just overlay the untapped ratings for you.
Mike Nelson: Huh.
Mike Nelson: Well, Vivino does that for wine, so you take
Mike Nelson: Sure, you take a picture of the label, and it automatically pulls up the vineyard, and the year, and…
Mike Nelson: It's… it's pretty cool. It's not.
Jerry Michalski: This one's been smart.
Mike Nelson: though, because beer is more fun than wine.
Jerry Michalski: Well, we are, all about sense-making on today's call, and this is sense-making about, bacteria created…
Jerry Michalski: Beverages that we love.
Jerry Michalski: … And, so it's, it's, it's interesting, I'm, I'm…
Jerry Michalski: nominally, one of the reasons OGM even exists is as an exercise in or an exploration.
Doug Breitbart: bots?
Jerry Michalski: Oops.
Doug Breitbart: the WeatherTech mats.
Jerry Michalski: Doug, I just muted you. Oh, except you just unmuted you. There we go.
Jerry Michalski: Good. So nominally, we're exploring the space of sense-making, and And…
Jerry Michalski: Sometimes we're doing some sense-making, sometimes we're just doing a salon, I'm not exactly sure, but I want to kind of explore that space, and I think several of you have strong feelings in different directions, so I'd love to bring those into
Jerry Michalski: the conversation, but I wanted to start with, your frustrations around sense-making. Just, let's do a little talk just around frustrations.
Jerry Michalski: Around sense-making.
Jerry Michalski: Which could include, it's impossible.
Jerry Michalski: I mean, it could easily include that. John, please, you first.
John Kelly: Okay, let me get… get unmuted here, just a second.
Jerry Michalski: Sweet, we hear you fine. Oh, you can hear me? Okay, great. Yes, yes.
John Kelly: Well, you know, when… on the one hand, at the positive extreme, there is this….
Jerry Michalski: It's glorious….
John Kelly: Situation that can happen when people who trust each other, you know, maybe not 100%, but 90%, and don't exactly
John Kelly: know what they're talking about, or agree, but kind of discover, hey, wait a minute, your idea is missing this and this and this, and my idea is… you know, and then you basically, you see something that neither one of you saw, or no one in the group saw ahead of time, and you say, wow, we… because we're together, we can put this together.
John Kelly: And it is… it's not a complete solution, but it's something novel none of us thought of, and it's… it's a pointer, it's a… it's a sign that says, hey, hey, go over here, go look in this direction, this is something you ought to check out. And so that's the positive. And when that happens, wow, you know, you say.
John Kelly: it might all be worth it. But the other extreme, which is where we spend much more of our time, is…
John Kelly: Hey, you know, we, like, 95% agree, but somehow we can only come up with this little tiny 5%
John Kelly: Little… not, you know…
John Kelly: motherhood statement that we agree on, and it's, like, so limited. It's like, well, wait a minute, is that all we can come up with? Well, you know, objections to everything else, you know. And, …
John Kelly: You know, there's a little inroad being made by AI, because it can look at the statements.
John Kelly: that we're making, and say, yeah, you thought you were really far apart, but actually there's a theme here that you're not seeing, which is… which is… connects you. So that's a possibility, but those are the… those are what I see as the continuum, you know, the… the great breakthrough when you… which is the reason why people collaborate with people, even with people they don't like.
John Kelly: And then at the other extreme is where we spend most of our time, where we kind of agree, but
John Kelly: We can only come out with a motherhood statement.
Jerry Michalski: Great, thanks, John. Marc Antoine.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Yeah, well, first, absolutely true. I mean, the…
Marc-Antoine Parent: The point of collective intelligence to me, let me start with collective intelligence, then I'll get into sense-making.
Marc-Antoine Parent: is…
Marc-Antoine Parent: the diversity of perspectives, like, the world is more complex than any one person can understand, so you need the diversity of perspectives to understand
Marc-Antoine Parent: The world, including other people who have
Marc-Antoine Parent: Which are part of that complexity.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And, the difficulty of
Marc-Antoine Parent: reaching consensus, and it's well known, you know, start with divergence and then come to convergence. And I think so much time and sense-making is spent in exploration, and that's absolutely necessary. You cannot converge if you haven't explored and negotiated and spent the time to
Marc-Antoine Parent: empathize with the other standpoint and to fully understand it. And, at some point.
Marc-Antoine Parent: There needs to be a process where you say, okay, let's see…
Marc-Antoine Parent: Can we make anything out of that?
Marc-Antoine Parent: That either we all agree on, or that some of us can agree to work with. Sometimes that's enough, right?
Marc-Antoine Parent: If people… if some people say, okay, we can bring this forward, like, for me, collective intelligence, which I've distinguished squarely from crowdsourcing, which is, you know, this aggregation without iteration, and collective intelligence, iteration has to be part of it.
Marc-Antoine Parent: and improving on one another's ideas, and that's, again, takes time. But being able to be strict about, let's go from this big map-making, which is important, to decision making. You know, I once was with
Marc-Antoine Parent: committee that defined, or… Simon Buckingham should proposed a definition of collective intelligence as, Collective sensing, collective sense-making, collective…
Marc-Antoine Parent: ideation, collective decision, collective action, and then you loop on that. I think those are all important. But to go to the… from the ideation to decision, you need to be able to
Marc-Antoine Parent: Pick out elements of the map, and decide, okay, we'll focus on this, we'll agree on that, this is out of scope, and this is a…
Marc-Antoine Parent: This is only possible if you have a goal.
Marc-Antoine Parent: It's nice to map, but if you… unless… and sometimes you don't have a common goal to start with, but if people have a goal, and then negotiating the goal may be part of the process, but.
Mike Nelson: At some point, you have to say.
Marc-Antoine Parent: We're not just trying to sense-make, though that's important, we're also trying to say, what do we do out of this? And the reality is a lot of sense-making also happens
Marc-Antoine Parent: In practice, in working together, in living the action together, because it's the iteration, that's the learning.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And it's the learning that's the sense-making. Over.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Marc Anton. And I want to gently herd us toward the frustrations we have with this, not to go defining the space yet.
Jerry Michalski: And talking about the deeper issues, because I know we have a lot of people who have really great ideas about what this is. Just, can we stay on the frustrations? Like, what's frustrating about sense-making, whether it's individual or collective, or anything like that? Mike, please.
Jerry Michalski: I'm gonna go right to that by building on what Marc Antoine just said. Perfect. In addition to having a goal.
Mike Nelson: You really desperately need a deadline, or some higher power that is pushing people
Mike Nelson: towards some kind of consensus. A lot of my negotiating experience, or at least my most frustrating negotiating experiences, have been negotiating over legislation in the U.S. Congress.
Mike Nelson: And worse, negotiation about various policy statements and conferences at the United Nations.
Mike Nelson: For instance, I was on the organizing committee for the Internet Governance Forum, and that was actually about as good as it gets in the UN system.
Mike Nelson: Because there was a deadline. You were going to have a conference on a certain day, in a certain place, and you had to put a schedule together, and you had to get speakers.
Mike Nelson: In contrast, there's something called the World Summit on the Information Society.
Mike Nelson: This was first held more than 20 years ago in, Geneva and then in Tunis.
Mike Nelson: And they were going to, you know, kind of scope out what the UN's role was in the…
Mike Nelson: digital future.
Mike Nelson: And unfortunately, there wasn't a common goal. I mean, we sort of pretended there was a common goal, which was to develop some principles that, you know, would apply in cyberspace. The U.S. was basically saying what applies
Mike Nelson: in real space applies in cyberspace, things like human rights.
Mike Nelson: But the Chinese had a different goal. Their goal was to water down the famous UN
Mike Nelson: Human Rights Declaration from the 40s. Other people were there because they liked going to meetings.
Mike Nelson: And particularly the guy from Tehran and from Syria, I mean.
Mike Nelson: These meetings meant a whole week, expense paid in Geneva.
Kevin Jones: Hmm.
Mike Nelson: We were supposed to have 3 meetings.
Mike Nelson: These guys made sure we had 5 meetings.
Mike Nelson: By just constantly throwing up objections.
Mike Nelson: And that leads to my conclusion about the largest frustration.
Mike Nelson: And I think Marc Antoine referred to this, and that is that you need complete consensus. You know, nobody objects. Well, that doesn't work. I mean, it allows one or two people to torque the whole process and hold everybody else hostage, and that just kept happening in these UN meetings.
Mike Nelson: … So instead, I recommend what the Internet Engineering Task Force does.
Mike Nelson: Which is rough consensus and running code.
Mike Nelson: And so when they develop a standard, in order to assess whether all the people in the room are on the same page.
Mike Nelson: They hum.
Mike Nelson: And so, if somebody has put forward a proposal, they will then
Mike Nelson: Let the room… after discussion, they will let the room hum.
Mike Nelson: And if there is an overwhelmingly loud hum.
Mike Nelson: And just a minor dissenting hum.
Mike Nelson: That's rough consensus.
Mike Nelson: And the test, then, is does it work? And so, usually, in order to get support and to get people to hum with you.
Mike Nelson: you have to show that this actually works, and works with other standards that the IETF has done. So that's sort of my ideal of sense-making, and I'm biased, I'm a techie geek, I spent many years at IBM and elsewhere involved in the IETF.
Mike Nelson: But the reason they hum is because people might show up
Mike Nelson: wearing a Cisco badge, or an IBM hat.
Mike Nelson: And, the corporate position might be different than theirs.
Mike Nelson: But as an engineer, they hum for the best technical solution, even if it doesn't.
Mike Nelson: help their company. And humming gives them anonymity.
Mike Nelson: Long talk, but hope that's helpful.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Mike. And, we're drifting again into solutions and what seems to work, as opposed to just frustrations. If I can keep us on frustrations for just a wee bit longer, until we've, like, put a couple good ones on the table, there's a couple good ones showing up in the chat.
Jerry Michalski: I think Eric was talking about, lack of shared context due to filter bubbles. That's a great frustration.
Jerry Michalski: Guilt, please.
Mike Nelson: If I can add one more, and that is just…
Mike Nelson: pervasive disinformation. You waste a lot of time trying to fix that problem.
Jerry Michalski: So when there's… when there's people actively trying to make sure that cents can't be made, that's a… that's a biggie. Yep.
Jerry Michalski: Guilt.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yep. … I love the humming, Mike, thank you for that.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: even if it maybe is a solution. Your discussion of the people who wanted the meetings to go on longer because there were expenses paid reminds me of the COP, the Conference on the Parties Around Climate, which is coming up in Bellam.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: In Brazil, shortly, where there will be 600 actual decision-forming delegates and 100,000 other people.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: overwhelming the city of Belle M, many of whom are there on expense accounts and happy to be there for whatever purpose. So, frustrations… so I'm frustrated with this conversation.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And I put a comment in the chat that I thought might be seen as flippant, but it was really serious, which is, I'm not clear what we mean by sense.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: that we are making… that we are sense-making about. I'm not clear what we mean by sense. Does sense mean…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Coming to an interpretation of, quote, reality that is somehow satisfying to me or furthers my expectations or cares or concerns. Does sense-making mean coming to some kind of shared interpretation about something?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Does it mean coming to shared commitment to action, consent, you know, decisions around coordination? Most of the conversation so far seems to have been about goals and decision-making, which I would suggest is a… is a subset of sense-making, and one that,
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Hmm.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, I understand why people said that's critical. It also gets… can get in the way of sense-making. Premature attention to goals implies a tacit sense-making that has already happened, maybe has not been spoken.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So I'm gonna echo what Eric said about context being really important.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: …
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But the fundamental question is not at all clear to me, so I'm frustrated that we're talking about sense-making with no idea or even sense of what we mean by sense.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I like that. Ben, I'll stop there. Frustrating enough for you, Jerry?
Jerry Michalski: That's good, that's good. And I'm surprised that nobody yet has talked about how little sense we might have made over time in OGM. I thought that would pop up pretty early, because I'm a little frustrated by that.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, what do you mean by… what do you mean by cents, Jerry?
Jerry Michalski: I think… I think we've had a very nice series of salon conversations that occasionally connect people, that occasionally put ideas we haven't heard of on the table, but we haven't done much sense-making.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: What do you mean by sense-making? I'm sorry, I don't mean to be… I don't mean to be an ass here, but I'm… I really… I don't know what you mean by sense, or sense-making, or what you're frustrated about, and I don't come to OGM for sense-making, so carry on.
Jerry Michalski: And if you'll give me a moment, I'm trying to head there. Okay. So I was first going to do a round of what are our frustrations with sense-making, and see what shows up, you know, what we put on the table. Then I was going to ask, what is evidence that sense-making has happened?
Jerry Michalski: What tells you individually, just personally, that some sense-making happened
Jerry Michalski: or, you know, when you show up somewhere, when you look at something, when you see an artifact, and you're like, oh, oh, oh, that's really good sense-making, and I'm sure this is going to be pretty particular to each of us, like, we'll have different opinions, but I'm very interested in what means sense-making happen? What are the remainders? What is the evidence of it?
Jerry Michalski: And I was gonna head from there back into…
Jerry Michalski: You know, what might we do about it, and how do we operate, and all those kinds of things, but we're sort of jumping straight in there. But Gil, I appreciate your.
Mike Nelson: You're being very hard on yourself. I think you and I both…
Mike Nelson: think sense-making is something that is documented in a document. It slides, it's a report.
Jerry Michalski: Not always.
Mike Nelson: AM has not written things, but all of us, several of us, have used the wisdom of this crowd.
Mike Nelson: to write some very good stuff. So I think you… you need to look at the broader ecosystem that you've engendered.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, and I really appreciate that. Let me go to the queue.
Jerry Michalski: And see what y'all think. But that's kind of where he was heading, with the discussion, because I want to address skills issue, but I think we can't
Jerry Michalski: get there, like, immediately, directly, until we've talked about some of these other things. Doug?
Doug Breitbart: So… My biggest, frustration sidestepping the issue of what you mean by sense-making and Gil's issue.
Doug Breitbart: … Is that this always starts at Chapter 3 or 4.
Doug Breitbart: And it doesn't really contend with…
Doug Breitbart: The fundamental ingredients at play.
Doug Breitbart: So… First of all, anything modified by the word collective in front of it, Is a major annoyance.
Doug Breitbart: For me, frustration for me, because the minute you start…
Doug Breitbart: voicing collective. It's sort of like, use of the word we by somebody speaking.
Doug Breitbart: You posit this aggregate thing that doesn't really exist.
Doug Breitbart: And then you set up the BTEXT for a general feeling of failure.
Doug Breitbart: Because it doesn't really exist, but it's… it becomes this sort of conceptualized ideal.
Doug Breitbart: And… but the we, which also doesn't exist, never arrives there.
Doug Breitbart: So it's sort of like, out of the box, let's set up a premise for failure.
Doug Breitbart: And then, you know, do the mosh pit metaphoric, you know, cockfighting as to who wins and who's right. So, just to sort of, like.
Doug Breitbart: You know, raise the fundamentals.
Doug Breitbart: When that happens, what it also does… is… it… it…
Doug Breitbart: Implicitly zeroes out and negates the concept of inclusion.
Doug Breitbart: Indigates the concept of individual agency.
Doug Breitbart: And it… it… Turns things into consensus, slash collective agreement Or alignment around a proposition, Rather than…
Doug Breitbart: The concept of arriving at Consent by all individuals involved.
Doug Breitbart: To whatever a conclusory proposition or action or intention is.
Doug Breitbart: And to arrive at consent, Means creating the generosity in the space.
Doug Breitbart: For all voices to be heard, for all turbulence or triggers to be processed and handled.
Doug Breitbart: And for people to arrive at a place where there is a general shared understanding that
Doug Breitbart: of the same it at the center that's being discussed or wrestled to ground. And… …
Doug Breitbart: 99% of the conversations, interactions, and…
Doug Breitbart: and gatherings like this that I experience, … do that.
Doug Breitbart: And it's a major frustration, because…
Doug Breitbart: The essentials of listening, of receiving.
Doug Breitbart: Of, respecting, appreciating, and supporting
Doug Breitbart: individuals in co-creating together, and… and co… co… … Formulating together and synthesizing together, Follow me.
Doug Breitbart: are considered… Not relevant, and not allowable in the name of efficiency and getting to a result.
Doug Breitbart: Like, we can't do that.
Doug Breitbart: Because it'll take too long.
Doug Breitbart: We'll never get to an output or a product, and with that, I'm complete.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Doug. It feels like you've put a whole bunch of fish on the table.
Jerry Michalski: that I can't quite distinguish from the others, some of which I disagree with. Like, I think collective intelligence is not a melapropism, or a misnomer, or a…
Jerry Michalski: Whatever. I think that it's actually…
Jerry Michalski: possible, and I put in the chat, Quaker sense of the meeting.
Jerry Michalski: which is a method that Quakers use to discuss issues, and then there's the clerk, which is a randomly assigned position, will say, I think we have sense of the meeting at some point, when not necessarily everybody has been heard from, but there's just… and they will report back what they think the meeting holds at that moment, and Quakers
Jerry Michalski: We use that as decision-making. Quakers don't believe in oath-taking or voting.
Jerry Michalski: Which makes it, you know, harder in normal democratic or group function, we're like, oh, we'll just all put dot voting or something, and dot voting on ideas is, I've seen, kill more good concepts in my life than I care to enumerate. And then you're also talking about
Jerry Michalski: the pressures of time in the name of efficiency, we're gonna have to skip a whole bunch of things that we should skip, and I'm like.
Jerry Michalski: I feel like my 27 years of feeding my brain is sense-making, and I don't feel like I'm under a deadline or pressure to do it. I feel like I make it public in order to have some kind of conversations that aren't necessarily materializing.
Jerry Michalski: I can count on one hand the people who've approached me and seem to understand what I've done with my brain, and engage me in conversations like that.
Jerry Michalski: But it's my earnest attempt to do that, and I do that every single day. But it's a slow process that metabolizes
Jerry Michalski: Information that connects, that links, that leaves behind an artifact.
Jerry Michalski: Which is a little bit why. I'm sort of like… Mike was like, well, we think that it's a report or a product. I'm not so sure. I think sense-making can just be an agreement or a sense that something happened, or if anybody's heard the name, the word senius, it's the idea that there can be a group of people that achieve something really special, and they have a sense of genius, of genius that happened in that scene, in that space.
Jerry Michalski: I think that's interesting, and that might be a form of sense-making, too, I think. And here I'm thinking maybe my sense of sense-making is very broad, and might be broader than most of us on the call, I don't know.
Jerry Michalski: But, … But, you know, maybe a hive of bees is sense-making where the…
Jerry Michalski: food gradient is going to send them next, and, like, which of the little pods to feed to make the next queen, kind of thing. That's a form of collective sense-making, and if you read Kropotkin, the scary anarchist, he's busy studying how nature comes to decisions that work out pretty well. I'm like, that's really cool, sounds like sense-making to me.
Jerry Michalski: With no conversation going on, right? Or, or some other forms of communication. Anyway…
Jerry Michalski: And Gil has something about bees. Is it a problem with bees, or is it, bee sting that you want to report in?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Oh, no, it's an insight about bees I just learned the other day, and someday tell me why you call Kerpotkin scary, but that's for another time.
Jerry Michalski: Oh, that was totally irony. That was totally irony.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Thank you, okay. Yeah. Because I'm a big fan. Me too.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So people know about the B dance.
Jerry Michalski: We wiggle, waggle.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: the bee waggle. Bees go out and find places where there's pollen and come back to the hive and do what's called a dance, or a waggling that is, huh, sense-making, or certainly communication of information about where the food is, and efficiently guides the hive
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: the worker bees in the hive to go find the food and bring stuff back to the colony, but it turns out that 10%, 10-20% of the bees do not do that. Do not follow the instructions.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And it's critically important that they do that. The deviance is essential. Without it, the hive would die.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So, part of the sense-making process is the outliers.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: That do not accept the consensus, that go their own way, that go off the ideal, efficient, so-called optimized path, and find other stuff.
Jerry Michalski: So are you suggesting that we rename Open Global Mind the Deviant Bee Laboratory?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, we've got, you know, we'll fight over biological metaphors. We've got the big fungus, and we've got the bee laboratory, and we'll have to make some sense of that some other time.
Jerry Michalski: I like that. Thanks, Gil.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Okay.
Jerry Michalski: Mark Antoine.
Marc-Antoine Parent: So, so much to get into. I, I was… I wanted to react to the notion that there's no such thing as collective intelligence. The, …
Marc-Antoine Parent: I'm a big fan of the work of Hugo Merci, who's basically claiming that human cognition evolved as collective cognition, not as individual cognition, and makes a solid argument that the
Marc-Antoine Parent: Cognitive biases are actually very good heuristics in a collective context, and absolutely unjustifiable in an individual cognition context.
Rick Botelho: No.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Now, that said, other points were made with which I agree much more. Like, there is a danger of premature convergence. That is totally a thing. There is a danger of… and the definition of us is…
Marc-Antoine Parent: do we agree us exists? And that's always a big, big, big issue, like when I mentioned this definition of collective sensing, sense-making, and so on, but what's the collective exist… the existence of the collective is a totally… totally a presupposition. And yet.
Marc-Antoine Parent: All cognition happens in interaction. That is what I'm going to propose. There is…
Marc-Antoine Parent: Now, of course, that means the group is always being renegotiated. Who's the insider, outsider, the inclusion, and putting the emphasis on inclusion was really important. Boundaries matter.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And… That said, I said my frustration I'd put at the top of the chat was.
Marc-Antoine Parent: One thing I find terrible is illusion of consensus.
Marc-Antoine Parent: when we think we agree, and it's actually way too fuzzy to be meaningful, and to be actionable, and to be precise. That is also a problem.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And yeah, the group can be a temptation to say, oh, we all agree, and there's such a thing as groupthink, and following the group, and saying we agree, and being agreeable to the group. So that is
Marc-Antoine Parent: Absolutely a real risk.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And yes, outliers matter for that.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And… …hem.
Marc-Antoine Parent: A shared purpose is defined by the group. It's not already there, it's something that emerges from the negotiation.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And the groups congregate around.
Marc-Antoine Parent: A shared action, when the action emerges from all these…
Marc-Antoine Parent: Yes, individual, but mostly happening in negotiation consensus.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And so the group is as much
Marc-Antoine Parent: Pre-existing as the product of the negotiation of goals and meaning, shared or not, and negotiated in action.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And the group is also characterized.
Marc-Antoine Parent: by a certain practice. I said, it's the action that defines the group, and it's the tradition that makes the group exist through time. It's a transmission of a certain way of doing things that makes the group exist and have a boundary.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And, … And again, it may splinter, it may evolve, it may… all kinds of things may happen.
Marc-Antoine Parent: But what defines a group? It's a shared practice, and as such, it's, again, … crystallized.
Marc-Antoine Parent: The result of a… the crystallized result of a prior sense-making, that ideally should be constantly renegotiated. Over.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks for your time.
Jerry Michalski: Mr. Jones, and if you don't mind, Kevin, my external perception of your life, in some sense, if I can just riff on this at this moment, is that you are kind of on a gradient sense-making mission in your life.
Jerry Michalski: Because you keep trying to find your way to what works, and you bump into stuff, and you bump into stuff, and you're like, well, you know, you did a nice job getting out of the dot-com implosion, and then you went into philanthropy, and then you're like, well, shit, this is not working. There's all sorts
Jerry Michalski: assuming…
Jerry Michalski: openness philanthropy. So you created an environment where you could invite in a whole mess of people, which becomes SOCAP, and sort of explore that area, and then you leave that behind. You're like, you need to go build a new nest. But you're… I perceive you as always, like, heading toward this thing you have in your head that is sense-making, personal.
Jerry Michalski: About what's gonna work.
Kevin Jones: Well, interesting. Yeah, I see myself as a truffle hound, you know, I have that much to do.
Jerry Michalski: That's a way to say the same thing.
Kevin Jones: Yeah, you know, I go sniff out what's next. But, you know, I've been reading a marathon of Ursula Le Guin's Hanish Cycle.
Kevin Jones: Which is about getting out of slavery. And, you know, sense-making leads to definitions, which is a great… the first tool of the colonizer is sense-making to definitions.
Kevin Jones: that validates, land grabs and saying who's an asset and who's a person. And so I think, you know, it's… which is, you know, obviously happening with ICE now and those kinds of things. And I think sense-making has been
Kevin Jones: more a tool of the conqueror than… yeah, I think it is sense-making. It totally is sense-making. It makes sense for them. No, it's… it's sense-making. Okay, I'm not going to argue with your chats. Sorry. Okay. They say, this is what is. That's what makes it happen, and this is without.
Kevin Jones: And so, you know, there was a revolt on the planet Yao, where the women said, we are no longer assets. And the men came along, and then they said, oh, but it is a patriarchy, and they said, well, no, that won't work either. But it was… sense-making leads to the powerful having the power to define.
Kevin Jones: And, you know, if you look at all land extractions, you know, the Marshall trilogy that made Native Americans a dependent nation, that therefore their land can't be an asset, and that they can't get a mortgage on it, and they can't get intergenerational wealth, was completely like redlining that, you know, African Americans couldn't get a government mortgage after the Depression, and they couldn't get it after being
Kevin Jones: in World War II with the GI Bill.
Kevin Jones: So, sense-making leads to a definition of the powerless.
Kevin Jones: By the powerful.
Jerry Michalski: So, Kevin, that was highly unexpected from my perspective, and I'm going to refuse to let you taint the word sense-making that deeply in my head. Others may go… others may go with you on this, but I could say that speech
Jerry Michalski: enables the powerful to have the power to define, oh my god, we should just cancel speech. We should never talk about speech, because all these people who've used speech to control us, they're just bad people, and look what effect that's happened on our lives. It's the source of all colonialism, it's the source of all bad things that have happened, and like.
Jerry Michalski: Not really. It's particular uses of sense or speech, or….
Kevin Jones: Yeah, yeah, that's a really stupid thing to have just said, okay? Because the people rose up.
Jerry Michalski: Sorry, Kevin, why did you say that that way?
Kevin Jones: I shouldn't have said it that way.
Jerry Michalski: Why did you say that that way, exactly?
Kevin Jones: because I thought it was a gross.
Kevin Jones: misunderstanding of what I said.
Jerry Michalski: Maybe it was a provocation or something, but why did you say it that way?
Kevin Jones: because I thought it was a gross misunderstanding of what I said, taking it to someplace where it never was and shouldn't have been, and it was so… it just rubbed me wrong, and I shouldn't have called it stupid. I should have called it.
Jerry Michalski: You didn't call it stupid, you sort of called me stupid.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Jerry, you've now asked him 4 times, he's answered 3 times.
Jerry Michalski: Okay.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Kind of… let's get escape velocity here.
Jerry Michalski: I did not like that intervention. I was trying to move your idea into a different spot and see what it provoked, but it certainly didn't need to provoke that.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Could I try something here?
Jerry Michalski: Yes, please.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: …
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Kevin, I hear what you're saying, and … but it seems that the women on whatever Le Guin's planet was, or whatever, are sense-making also. It seems that the people being colonized are sense.
Kevin Jones: That's great.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: also.
Kevin Jones: They claimed their voice.
Kevin Jones: Well, that's sense-making, too, so you're using the word in a very particular way of, you know, how sense-making is used by dominators.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: As opposed to sense-making itself, I think.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: That's how I'm hearing you.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Because we're all about… you, in fact, in speaking what you spoke, were doing a bit of sense-making. In other words, sharing an interpretation that you have formed out of your experience.
Kevin Jones: You know, okay.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yep.
Jerry Michalski: So, let's not get stuck on this.
Jerry Michalski: I'm sorry… Excuse me.
Kevin Jones: Team is the tool of the powerful.
Jerry Michalski: Which I totally disagree with. If you read CAST by Isabel Roberson, she's like, what happens is, somebody comes in, creates an artificial distinction, reinforces that artificial distinction in a community, and that causes all kinds of shit that is how you create a colonial power structure that works. And I totally agree that that's happened over and over again. I don't think that was sense-making. I think that was redefining
Jerry Michalski: words for everybody, and then applying value, differential value, that normally would not make sense to any of the participants in the community, but that they are forced to live under. And for me, none of that was sense-making, it was re-establishing… it was like, …
Jerry Michalski: you know, in Taming of the Shrew, there, you know, there's the moon in the sky, and everybody's like, no, no, shit, that's the sun. It's like, oh, if we don't say that to the moon, we die. We don't get food, we don't get married, we don't get anything. So I kind of get where it goes. But to me, that's not sense-making, and we can leave… we can leave the debate on the for a second if we want. There's a bit of a queue that's been quite patient.
Jerry Michalski: So how about class?
Klaus Mager: Yeah, so, …
Klaus Mager: maybe because of my German upbringing and background, when I hear the word collective, it rings a completely different bell than what this conversation has been going on for so far, right? And then you initiated the conversation saying collective intelligence.
Klaus Mager: But somehow we morphed into sense-making, which is a completely different topic again.
Klaus Mager: And it's connected, but, you know, so collective intelligence… It really is, … …
Klaus Mager: like a mass movement, right? I mean, you… I'm thinking of herds of waves when I see collective.
Klaus Mager: You know, you have, you have a consensus building where people maintain the same opinion, maintain a worldview that moves them into action.
Klaus Mager: And that's what we're seeing right now, right? So, particularly within the context of our current environment, our political environment.
Klaus Mager: …
Klaus Mager: This is… this is a pretty ominous kind of state that we are in, where collective intelligence is being manipulated, you know, to create a worldview that has people do things in groups.
Klaus Mager: That are… that are rather harmful.
Klaus Mager: So that's where… and I've posted a couple articles on a definition of intelligence. First of all, you know, what do we mean by intelligence from a technical perspective?
Klaus Mager: And then what…
Klaus Mager: what are the… what are the influences, you know, of collective? And I'm really emphasizing that the conversation should be on what is collective, not what is intelligence or sense-making, but what does it mean within the context of collective.
Klaus Mager: Right? Because that's where we are right now, and that's an extremely dangerous moment in time, and we're completely skirting the topic.
Jerry Michalski: Klaus, thank you for the warning about how collective hits you because of your background. That's super useful. And I'm… my intent with starting this call was both personal sense-making and collective, but the thing I'm most interested in is the collective part of it, like you just said.
Jerry Michalski: But I think without us on our own little sense-making quests, we don't get good collective intelligence in some sense, but I don't feel strongly about what I just said.
Jerry Michalski: Mr. Mooring, please.
Jerry Michalski: who has been trying to help us make sense out of things with DSRP and other frameworks over time, and showing us his experiments, and… please!
Scott Moehring: Hello, everyone.
Scott Moehring: So one of my themes has been how the individuals aggregate to the group, and when we talk about collective.
Scott Moehring: there is… in a sense, collective is the aggregation, I believe, of all the individuals, and I kind of…
Scott Moehring: have been taught to think about it as a bunch of people on a beach in a giant clear plastic ball, and they're all walking inside the ball, and it's sort of, where does the ball go? Well, there might be some who are trying to go this way, but most of them are going this way, so the ball generally follows that vector.
Scott Moehring: And the reason I bring that up is that I've been thinking about why we think, which is why we make a mental model, which is our sense-making, our collective, our intelligence, if you will.
Scott Moehring: And the conclusion I came to, and this is just kind of my own, is we want to interpret the past so we can predict the future, so we can decide and act.
Jerry Michalski: And so the whole reason to make sense….
Scott Moehring: Or to have a collective intelligence, is to inform Our predictions and our actions.
Scott Moehring: And I think that that's an interesting way of thinking about it for me, and I'm not sure
Scott Moehring: others will riff on this, but I just wanted to throw that out there, that that… a mental model is a prediction, and a collective intelligence, to my way of thinking, is a…
Scott Moehring: Mental model held by a collective.
Scott Moehring: So….
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Scott.
Jerry Michalski: Mark up front real quick?
Marc-Antoine Parent: Ye… Absolutely agreed. Sense-making is partly a mental model, and a mental model update, but it's also
Marc-Antoine Parent: it's a storytelling, and a story, in a way, is a simplified version of the model. It's what can fit in the brain of a very complex world, and it's also about negotiating
Marc-Antoine Parent: shared,
Marc-Antoine Parent: sense of provenance and purpose. There's the… there's a prediction as utilitarian, let's get to a goal, and there's a prediction as a sense of being somebody, a certain kind of person, in a certain kind of group.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And that is… that is the other side of sense-making. It's a… it's also feeding identity, as well as
Marc-Antoine Parent: Action. Purposeful action.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Over.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Doug.
Doug Breitbart: I sort of wanted to lose.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: born.
Doug Breitbart: And I wanted to loop back, to….
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Dude!
Doug Breitbart: The difference between censoring
Doug Breitbart: Which is a thing that I do as a human being, and other human beings do.
Doug Breitbart: Versus sense-making.
Doug Breitbart: And The di- and the shift into sense-making
Doug Breitbart: One man's sense is another's nonsense.
Doug Breitbart: And that was you, and that was… that was you and Kevin.
Doug Breitbart: In that moment, And the… the difference between things that are…
Doug Breitbart: That are susceptible and intrinsic to being subjective.
Doug Breitbart: Versus… The ingredients of, of, of humans as living beings.
Doug Breitbart: and the way I experience… the way I receive and take in information.
Doug Breitbart: the way I respond to that, and the way I respond to others.
Doug Breitbart: … There are the… there are the sort of the ingredients and dimensions of that.
Doug Breitbart: But then there's the… transformation of All of that into beliefs.
Doug Breitbart: Into frameworks and protections and attachments.
Doug Breitbart: and constructs.
Doug Breitbart: Which are all products of mind.
Doug Breitbart: They're not of reality, they're of mind.
Doug Breitbart: And… My… I would argue that the Quakers are, in sense, making their sensing in that meeting form.
Doug Breitbart: And…
Doug Breitbart: And I think, you know, I align with… with what Mark just shared.
Doug Breitbart: In terms of…
Doug Breitbart: understanding which is… individual, And… With others, so coming to a common understanding of whatever, fill in the blank.
Doug Breitbart: Is intrinsically, you know, … An, unevolved, evolving, and, and, and, … elaborative.
Doug Breitbart: process.
Rick Botelho: decide… She's a cliffhanger.
Jerry Michalski: I just needed Rick.
Doug Breitbart: You know, it is an elaborative process, and is a constantly changing one.
Doug Breitbart: the… The illusion, delusion, like, addiction, the… Seems to prevail culturally.
Doug Breitbart: around… Fixing understandings in a moment of time, and then playing them forward.
Doug Breitbart: And believing that they control future to be, rather than the future to be.
Doug Breitbart: Being the dog and us being the tail.
Doug Breitbart: Is… is the challenge.
Doug Breitbart: And we love our constructions, and our models, and our frameworks and our stuff, but the truth of the matter is that we don't have any control over what happens next.
Doug Breitbart: And the world we're living in is sort of a living example, but that's… the case.
Doug Breitbart: So, I'm complete at.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Doug.
Jerry Michalski: Kevin.
Kevin Jones: Well, again, I'll apologize for my overreaction. It just felt like you were doing violence to my idea, and I just… it was a limbic reaction. But I'm with Doug on collective and making, and I think, to me, sense-making feels like you want to come out with a toaster, when I think you should come out with a…
Kevin Jones: You should have sniffed a sock that leads you down a trail.
Kevin Jones: And… and so that… and the collective is… is always, you know, the group is a conspiracy against the outlier. One of the reasons I knew SOCAP would succeed is I, …
Kevin Jones: I started going to people, should there be a conference like this? And … another guy said, you know, there were two groups. Okay, this is… this story has a point. There was a group led by TIDES, and one led by Aspen Institute, and they were trying to define this thing, and I said, I'll do a conversation map
Kevin Jones: between them, and how they define it versus you, because nobody could agree on what to call it, and they were fighting over definitions. And then they said, oh, you know, there's only 10 minutes worth. Then they said, there's no time, and they said, well, don't you want to know what the people who are not in the room are saying? And they said, no, we think we have the right people in the room. And I said, oh.
Kevin Jones: What a great market opportunity!
Kevin Jones: You know, they think… when you have the right people in the room, you have a summit.
Kevin Jones: And what we needed was a marketplace where the Byzantine and the barbarian could discover each other as unlikely allies.
Kevin Jones: Fortunately for me, they all went to good schools and had flown business class to their families' vacations, and so they were not ready for somebody to say, no, these folks that are outsiders to you need to be brought in, and we can explain why they can be unlikely allies.
Kevin Jones: So, you know, sense-making is not a toaster.
Jerry Michalski: There's a bumper sticker. Mike, bumper sticker, alert, sense-making is not a tester.
Jerry Michalski: Dave?
David Witzel: Yeah, I mean, I think I just wanted to throw in, like, what I think of it, probably data points, but, I mean, I was, … Mark, you said something about the… in the chat, I think, about the, you know, the individual doesn't exist, and except to the individual, you know? And I do think we're kind of caught between
David Witzel: sense-making as an individual effort, you know, I'm trying to make my sense… I'm trying to make sense versus sense-making as a collective effort, which is I'm trying to make shared sense.
David Witzel: And… and the shared sense, I think, is where it's really… the idea that trying to convince people is violence is, I think, more often in the shared sense space
David Witzel: And I was struck, my wife is working at Cal, and the new students are coming on to campus this week, and she was doing an exercise where she was asking them to talk about their strengths. And she said she heard from a lot of them that they had a strength which was listening.
David Witzel: …
David Witzel: And she thought it was interesting that that was, you know, such a prominent strength, and I asked her if anybody said their strength was debating, and nobody says that anymore. And I swear that's a… that's an era change thing, right? I mean, listening is a modern skill set. I'm pretty sure, you know, in a big chunk of, you know, CPAC and stuff, debating is still a strong force.
David Witzel: … But they have different effects on the sense-making, right?
David Witzel: And then the other… the other… one thing I've been going… I just came back from Vermont, and in Vermont, where we… where we go to the lake, there's this big Amish community. So you have this Amish community that has this sense of their culture, living surrounded by this Vermont, you know, traditional white kind of
David Witzel: whatever Vermont community is. And they're quite distinct, but they're still…
David Witzel: coherent, right? So, they have two very different senses, but they both work, you know? So I think this notion of an ultimate sense is probably a flawed notion, right? There's… there's many of them out there, you know, it's kind of enough cooperation or something that you can… you don't end up killing each other.
David Witzel: And then maybe the last data point was just one. I was listening to the Zach Bush,
David Witzel: interview yesterday, trying to figure out what he means, and he… one of these observations was that… that… that we don't have to worry about AI, because AI will never be able to understand the way humans do, because AI has been trained on words.
David Witzel: And it's… I think it's that map and the territory kind of idea. Words have… we've trimmed words of a whole bunch of their meaning, you know, so we say, oh, the sky is blue.
David Witzel: But the sky's blue, it's, you know, this wonderful, all this stuff that's going on up there. We use the word blue, it's so simple, and AI will never understand all of the beauty, you know, and so you'll… it'll always have lost some of the sense of the… of whatever it is we're experiencing.
David Witzel: And I felt really good about that for about 3 minutes, and then I realized that, well, the AIs are going to be able to suck in all the satellite data in a bunch of different dimensions that I can never experience. So, still, the AI's going to be able to sense in many more dimensions than I can sense.
David Witzel: So we shouldn't still probably be afraid of the AI. But, but, …
David Witzel: But I do think that, you know, we do our… in our effort to have joint sense-making, the colonialism part of it is this creating of the map problem.
David Witzel: Right, where we simplify ideas so that we can then share them, but when we do that, we've lost some of the senses.
Jerry Michalski: Dave, thank you. I think one of the pet peeves we haven't mentioned so far that you just put on the table is oversimplification.
Jerry Michalski: it's like, sometimes in order to get agreement, we… or we use a word that is simpler, but kind of good enough, or whatever, and we miss it. And one of my beliefs, one of my personal beliefs about this is that… excuse me…
Jerry Michalski: Two people can never really agree completely on anything. There isn't… twins, born and raised the same, are going to be… are going to have a different understanding of some setting, context, sentence, whatever it might be, and it'll be colored by the last thing they read, or whatever it might be. We can never, ever get 100% overlap.
Jerry Michalski: What we can get is close to good enough agreement where major things aren't going to destroy the thing that's important to what we're agreeing on.
Jerry Michalski: And that, definitionally, we've squirreled down, chased down.
Jerry Michalski: enough of the weasel words, or words that might mean different things to different people. Sorry, short story. A really long time ago, when I launched a service in 1990 for new science called Intelligent Document Management, our VP of Sales came back from a meeting with IBM completely worried.
Jerry Michalski: And he had… he had my issue of the review of Image Plus, IBM's imaging offer, all marked up in red.
Jerry Michalski: And, he had just come back with a meeting with Dave Liddell. So I wound up, a week later, having a call with this VP at IBM, Dave Liddell, and he starts out very thoughtfully, and he says, Jerry, I think maybe we mean different things by the same words.
Jerry Michalski: And I'm like, what do you mean? He says, well, in your write-up, you said that ImagePlus was neither open, nor strategic.
Jerry Michalski: And to us, anything that's that big an offer in the product lineup is strategic, and anything that offers even a tiny little window where you could poke in data and pull out data is open. And to me, open is like open source.
Jerry Michalski: And strategic means it's actually strategic for the business in some way, and we had a delightful conversation, and he became my client. He signed up for my Intelligent Document Management Service. That was one of my early, early lessons in this
Jerry Michalski: Oh, wow, sometimes we mean very different things, and sometimes the context of the word is political internally, and the internal context and the politics of it
Jerry Michalski: don't let you see very useful contexts that other people have for the same damned word, etc, etc, and we haven't even opened that cam. Anyway, there's so much interesting territory here. Jack, thank you for your patience.
Jack Park: And thank you for that segue, Jerry, because, …
Jack Park: What I wanted to talk about
Jack Park: is, first of all, at the highest level, sense-making, to me, is the left side of Theory U.
Jack Park: It's, it's, it's the side where you, you do the sensing.
Jack Park: And you organize all the data, and now I want to go into collective intelligence, but I first want to ground the term intelligence in the fact that all biological entities, all organismic entities, are model builders.
Jack Park: And…
Jack Park: Basically, sense-making turns out to be as much aligning… sensing on the data in front of you as it is aligning the models in the room.
Jack Park: And this goes to collective intelligence.
Jack Park: And so, intelligence, in my view.
Jack Park: As a model builder, is how you deal with expectation failures.
Jack Park: Think about it. If you are anticipating, your model is predicting the future, and the future doesn't happen the way you expect it, how do you deal with it? That's a degree of intelligence.
Jack Park: It's, it's, it's, it's like the, the, the, the young child that first encounters a large, ugly bug.
Jack Park: how they deal with it is they run screaming to mom. But eventually, as they learn more and build a bigger model about what the bugs are.
Jack Park: they don't run screaming to Mom anymore. They may actually pick it up and hold it and look at it, or whatever. I mean, I remember my son
Jack Park: … at… I don't know, maybe…
Jack Park: a year and a half old, walking over in Tennessee and noticing a gigantic Very, very bright blue beetle.
Jack Park: Then he walked over and picked it up.
Jack Park: He wasn't afraid of it.
Jack Park: He had a different model of the world than I do.
Jack Park: I… I… me, I wouldn't go near it. It was just a beetle.
Jack Park: But, to me, it was ugly as hell. So, so through, through, through, through my model of the universe, collective sense-making.
Jack Park: Is how the collective deals with
Jack Park: The differences in their models and the oncoming input streams and, and, and…
Jack Park: I'm going… I'm going to use that just for a moment, sorry, to drag you sideways, and… and… and… and talk about Marc Antoine's hyperknowledge.
Jack Park: Hyperknowledge, is about… This is… this… I'm channeling Marc Antoine, not putting words in his mouth.
Jack Park: And he'll likely correct me, and that's okay. That's what… that's what sense-making is about. But my understanding of Marc Antoine is that you are… you… you have an ecosystem of…
Jack Park: A platform which deals with multiple input streams.
Jack Park: And allows agents of all kinds
Jack Park: to play with those streams as if they were GET repos.
Jack Park: And what that's… and I think that that's a model of what the brain does. So… so… I… I… I've… I've re…
Jack Park: I've gone and reduced collective intelligence and all of that to Marc Antoine's hyperknowledge, which is… which is incorrect, but it's my sense of what's going on.
Jack Park: Over.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Jack.
Jerry Michalski: Klaus.
Klaus Mager: Yeah, along those same lines, I mean, I love TheoEU, and I've been an ardent,
Klaus Mager: A student of it, … Intelligence really needs some definition, I think, because
Klaus Mager: It… it really depends on the information that you have and the context that you live within.
Klaus Mager: So, for example, a farmer
Klaus Mager: can be incredibly, intelligent about his soil, his land. You know, the, the, influence of
Klaus Mager: Climate, water, you know, soil conditions.
Klaus Mager: You can have a craftsman who works with a material, let's say with wood.
Klaus Mager: who understands, who looks at this wood, touches it, and feels things about what he can create with this wood by carving it, that completely escapes anyone else. So is that intelligence?
Klaus Mager: So, there are layers of intelligence, so as we make decisions as a collective about farming, for example.
Klaus Mager: Is the decision-making body really informed and knowledgeable about what's happening in that soil?
Klaus Mager: Yet make decisions that, may completely alienate this farmer away from his soil. So there is a… there is a hierarchy in intelligence.
Klaus Mager: You know, that… that has to be built from the ground on up into… into… into… into more narrative types of, intelligence. And…
Klaus Mager: And I think that's where you would need
Klaus Mager: An unbiased, unfettered, intentional form of intelligence that is collective, meaning being respectful.
Klaus Mager: You know, to every layer of, of intelligence that needs to be combined into… into a common understanding.
Klaus Mager: Yeah, and I think we are missing that, and there is a certain arrogance in our decision-making process, in our political decision-making process, that is so far removed from the reality of the natural world.
Klaus Mager: You know, but just assumes that, it knows. And so it's that, I mean, Donnella Meadows, you know, the hierarchy of, of a system.
Klaus Mager: Where in every layer of that hierarchy, there is an embedded intelligence.
Klaus Mager: That needs to be heard, and that needs to be embedded and incorporated.
Klaus Mager: You know, and so I think that's what we're struggling with right now, because we have become… we… our collective intelligence is so far removed.
Klaus Mager: You know, from… from what I would just maybe frame as reality, the natural world, you know, that we have gotten into a lot of trouble.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Klaus. Let's, Mark and Phil, I know you'd like to jump in. Let's take a short silence break, and I'll bring us back in, and you can jump in. So…
Jerry Michalski: Let's just be silent with this for a bit. We've been going hot and heavy for an hour.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you. I'm intrigued and a little bit worried that all this interest in generative AI has caused conversations about intelligence, consciousness, etc, etc, to just bubble over. I mean, that pot is boiling over right now in interesting ways and places, but …
Jerry Michalski: Over to you, Marc Anton.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Thanks for breaking the rhythm, because it is a matter of rhythm, isn't it?
Marc-Antoine Parent: I want to build over what Klaus was saying, right? There's… We… a lot of…
Marc-Antoine Parent: We have a problem with hubris and arrogance. We necessarily deal with simplified models of the world.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Because… limited cognitive capacity.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And believing that our map is the territory is hubris.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And for me, the whole point of collective sense-making is
Marc-Antoine Parent: the act of triangulation and checking, you know, I have this map of the world that's necessarily partial, and let's compare maps a bit to see what I may have missed, or what you may have missed, or what we may all have missed.
Marc-Antoine Parent: … And… It's a practice.
Marc-Antoine Parent: the ability.
Jerry Michalski: to….
Marc-Antoine Parent: Listen, the ability to not hold fast to our conclusions.
Marc-Antoine Parent: To our map.
Marc-Antoine Parent: The, habit.
Marc-Antoine Parent: of checking.
Marc-Antoine Parent: We're… The rigidity of our assumptions, and the emotional stake we have in our beliefs.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And how we often bind it to our identity. I spoke of identity earlier, there's a positive sense of identity. Sometimes identity is what makes us
Marc-Antoine Parent: remember to act in ways that are pro-social. And sometimes, identity is what makes us cling to a parochial view of the world.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And again, it's all a practice of questioning.
Marc-Antoine Parent: kind of taking the time to question, why do I believe this? And I believe strongly in… Collective sense-making.
Marc-Antoine Parent: As an arena, Where we may stop and listen.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And, and be confronted.
Marc-Antoine Parent: 2.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Other perspectives, because that's important.
Marc-Antoine Parent: That's… that's it. I wanted to go into practice and learning. For me, there's a pedagogy of sense-making, and that's something we're working on with Jack, with Sensecraft. It's, can we make it into a game? And the question of tempo is not fully addressed yet, but something I care deeply about. What is the tempo of
Marc-Antoine Parent: reading through what somebody else has said, and penetrating it, and trying to… okay, what does that mean? What does that mean to me? How can I not just react, but
Marc-Antoine Parent: Build on, and integrate.
Marc-Antoine Parent: What was said? Over.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Dave.
David Witzel: Yeah, I was, …
David Witzel: I was thinking of maybe Mark and Jerry, what you'd said about AI, that… my thought is that the sense-making is collective, but the sense is individual.
David Witzel: And one of the problems is trying to remember that the sense is individual, right? Because we then adopt our map and assume it's reality, and we forget that it isn't, and, you know, we have to go back and forth and re-update that.
David Witzel: And so then the violence comes when we try to take our individual sense and force other people to understand it, or to adopt it, which I think may be a critique of politics, you know, Mike, recently, that, you know, the technocracy was the effort of the elite to force a whole bunch of people to understand, you know, democracy, the good life, a whole bunch of things, in a way that they had decided was best, and then impose it through policy.
David Witzel: And we're seeing a reaction to that, which is, I don't care how bad it is, but you're not going to tell me what it should be.
David Witzel: So, … but I was thinking, Jerry, I mean, and I don't want to take you off the sense-making stream, but I also feel like this group is not only about sense-making, right? Sense-making is one of the things that we do collectively.
David Witzel: And… and I was thinking, you know, actually, you know, the AI is a thing, it's gonna be there.
David Witzel: to me, one of the push… the forces that will be balancing against AI is human connection.
David Witzel: And I think we've been undervaluing human connection. Can we need you, you know, back in this game, kind of, because
David Witzel: we have a whole bunch of technologies that support human connection, and human connection does sense-making as one of its things, but it's… there's so many things that human connection does, right? It's a… it's a fundamental relationship, and I think we've been… we've kind of…
David Witzel: I would say, in a societal way, I mean, perhaps we have under, you know, this is… maybe it's… it's Putnam and social capital kinds of analysis, right? But we… we have a lot of skills and… and techniques that kind of reinforce and strengthen human
David Witzel: human connection, and I actually think, OGM, one of the really magical things about it is this collection of people who know so much about human connection getting together and connecting with each other, but we actually could be much more devoted to the idea of increasing connection, right? I mean, that there's, you know, there's tools, there are ideas, there's experiences that we have.
David Witzel: that are really special, that I think could, … can really make a contribution to global human connection.
David Witzel: Which we're really gonna want.
Jerry Michalski: … Dave, thank you. Let's just be quiet with that for just a second.
Jerry Michalski: Let's see… Worth sitting with.
Jerry Michalski: You also made me think that human connection is sometimes a shortcut to sense-making.
Jerry Michalski: Meaning, if I bond with somebody in whatever way, and I really trust them, and something they do makes me realize that their advice or point of view on things is good, I will slide over and adopt a lot of their points of view, a lot of the way… a lot of the sense-making that I infer.
Jerry Michalski: From what they say and do.
Jerry Michalski: and happily, you know, inhabit that space, I think. It's a… the trusted connection is a shortcut or a shorthand
Jerry Michalski: to the logical process of making your way through facts, or whatever it is. And then, earlier, I was thinking that there's some sense-making that has nothing to do with facts and logic. It's all about story and… and connection, and …
Jerry Michalski: And those are important as well. Those are a form of sense-making as well. Mike?
Mike Nelson: A lot of richness there, and some of the previous comments. I don't think I've ever seen so much material in the chat, or so much good material.
Mike Nelson: I just wanted to add on to that idea that human connection is sort of the foundation.
Mike Nelson: And say that one way we make sense and share sense is through stories.
Mike Nelson: And a lot of them aren't true. A lot of them are fairy tales. I mean, the truth in the Bible is probably more in, …
Mike Nelson: The stories of how humans have interacted.
Mike Nelson: And how there might be some greater power than it is in the specific…
Mike Nelson: principles that you're supposed to live your life around. I mean, Deuteronomy is not a good outline.
Mike Nelson: To define how you live your life.
Mike Nelson: But some of the parables of Jesus, like the Good Samaritan, I think, are. So, I hope that at some point we'll spend more time on powerful untruths, or powerful untruths narratives. And that is what
Mike Nelson: the MAGA people have done so well. I mean, they know full well that the Haitians weren't eating dogs.
Mike Nelson: But boy, that was a story that they all told each other, and it had the added virtue of owning the libs and making them upset that such a lie would go so far and influence so many people.
Mike Nelson: So I just want to… I talked earlier about how sense often is reflected in a negotiated document.
Mike Nelson: I think sense is also more powerfully conveyed in a story. And I'll just finish with one reference, one footnote. One of the most powerful things I've ever read in the Harvard Business Review
Mike Nelson: more than 15 years old, is called the CEO as Storyteller.
Mike Nelson: And it's a brilliant… … 7 or 8 page essay with lots of examples.
Mike Nelson: Of how, by changing the way a company thought.
Mike Nelson: By telling just a couple stories.
Mike Nelson: Ceos can change the game, particularly a new CEO who's coming in to… Fix a big mess.
Mike Nelson: Over.
Jerry Michalski: … Thanks, Mike.
Jerry Michalski: I didn't test that link, I hope it still works.
Jerry Michalski: But that should be the article at HBS.
Marc-Antoine Parent: It's broken. I gave another one, I'm not sure it's the right one.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you. This was an article by Bronwyn Fryer and Robert McKee, called Happy Tales
Jerry Michalski: I'll put the title in, and then we can find a good link, and I'll correct the link in my brain. Thanks.
Jerry Michalski: Rick?
Rick Botelho: Yeah, I've been using my silence to use co-intelligence about collective intelligence and the wisdom of the crowd.
Rick Botelho: And I came up with a… I was just asking questions to AI as we were going through.
Rick Botelho: And this is very crude, because typically when you do something like that, you form a question, you formulate, you iterate on it, but so this is just a, a sort of, …
Rick Botelho: about 10 questions that came to mind, and we don't have time to do justice to any of them. But I think it speaks to how to create an inquiry mind.
Rick Botelho: And, you know, Mike, last week we talked about the meaning of hen.
Rick Botelho: And you were encouraging me to simplify it. And actually, I think I've come up with a good rationale for not doing it, and just calling it N.
Rick Botelho: Because, you know, I got sort of lambasted by 3 people by saying, I've got to simplify it, simplify it, simplify it. That's the KISS principle. Yes, it has its merit, but I think somebody said during this conversation that sometimes when you simplify a word, it loses some of the original meaning.
Rick Botelho: And so, the construct of this learning process is different to what we're experiencing now.
Rick Botelho: And I invite… I'll put a link into that if people are curious about a different type of learning method that goes against the grain of what we've been taught. And the whole purpose of it, actually, is to shift
Rick Botelho: from fast thinking to slow thinking, because most of the time we're in these groups, we pause a little bit. We may do a little slow thinking, but it's sort of rapid-fire, you know, communication, and it doesn't allow space. So the slow thinking can happen afterwards.
Rick Botelho: But one thing I haven't done yet, and I was wondering if anybody else's had, but Plexity has the capacity of doing group work.
Rick Botelho: And I was wondering whether anybody's had an experience with it, because what I just shared could be something that could be group work. People could look at the questions, you know, disagree or whatever it is, and try and prove it. But, you know, there are people who are… still remain highly skeptical of AI and what it can do for us.
Rick Botelho: But what I think it's good at is lowering the flow of ignorance so that we can actually raise our collective wisdom.
Rick Botelho: And it can scope things out far quicker. I mean, for example, through this conversation, one thing that kept ricocheting through my mind was sociocracy. Now, that's just one method.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Funny enough.
Rick Botelho: Of dealing with, … it's a different methodology for thinking about how groups can work together, where it's not consensus, it's consent.
Rick Botelho: And that's different.
Rick Botelho: That means everyone's objections to whatever's agreed is honored. You build middle… you build some middle ground where you say, is this good enough to move forward?
Rick Botelho: And then you can iterate based upon what your experience is of doing Wicked problems, such that somebody's… the outlier may have had the most important contribution, but got marginalized, and it may come to pass that that person's contribution was the most important, so it can be incorporated in.
Rick Botelho: So I think there's different, frameworks of sociocracy, and there's different… people have been, you know, have different frames for what collective means. I mean, Klaus' frame of collective is different to some of other people's, and if we don't define the terms, then people's negative or positive connotations to the words
Rick Botelho: are going to get, it's going to, affect the flow of the conversation. Anyway, I'll put the link in for Hen.
Rick Botelho: And if people are interested. It's 25 modules there, and it's a course that I'm developing, for enabling people to develop their slow thinking skills.
Rick Botelho: I'm Rick and I'm done speaking.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Rick.
Jerry Michalski: It costs.
Klaus Mager: Yeah, I've gone, …
Klaus Mager: some work with Spyodynamics, and I've been into understanding this, and worked with AI, you know, to take a deep dive into,
Klaus Mager: Using… using spiral Dynamics as a… as a communications tool. …
Klaus Mager: So, you can play, with that by taking a concept.
Klaus Mager: And explaining and spinning that concept out at a high cognitive level.
Klaus Mager: And then explain that same concept.
Klaus Mager: going through the spiral, going through, you know, the green, orange, red, I mean, blue, red stages, and see how the, the, you know, using AI, how it adapts this message
Klaus Mager: to these different stages of cognition. And clearly, the story loses part of it, you know? If you are trying to explain to,
Klaus Mager: I mean, I don't mean to put any qualitative into this, but let's say you go to a worker, you know, with a high school education, and you try to explain, you know, a concept that comes from a science perspective.
Klaus Mager: You have to illustrate it in ways where it lives within the context of the person you're communicating with.
Klaus Mager: So, the same is true if you're communicating with a farmer. You know, the conceptual expression is stiff, has to be adapted to that farmer.
Klaus Mager: If you insist on keeping your language at the level that, is… You know, where, where, …
Klaus Mager: where you are, or where someone you're listening to is, and not wanting to change it, because you don't want to lose anything. What you do is you lose the person you want to communicate with, because they don't get anything.
Klaus Mager: So there is a need to adapt, you know, to, to the stages and the, the cognitive development of your audience. And that's coming back to Donila Meadows. I mean, that's clearly…
Klaus Mager: you know, what the pyramid of a system, what she is saying. You know, you have to adjust to each stage and speak the language of that stage in order to be heard and in order to hear as well, you know.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Klaus. I think that, this whole… this notion of,
Jerry Michalski: The work you've done to adapt
Jerry Michalski: the messages you have to people at different levels in the spiral Dynamics model is very much some sort of adaptive sense-making or something like that. You're trying to connect to different people who might have different
Jerry Michalski: priorities, values, etc, etc, and so you've asked the AIs to help you change the wording and the metaphors and the everything done so that it might click for different audiences. It's been really, really fascinating to watch. I appreciate that.
Jerry Michalski: … Let me ask a question that came up a little bit earlier in this call, which is.
Jerry Michalski: And I know that sense-making is one of the things that OGM is nominally meant to do.
Jerry Michalski: Are we doing enough of it? Should we do more of it? Should we change how we do it? I'm happy to… I did, I think, only once. I don't think I did this twice. Maybe I did it two calls?
Jerry Michalski: But I challenged people to show up with their own sense-making tools, and we talked about something for 20 minutes, and then we compared notes on how we had made sense of the conversation with, you know, people screen-sharing, their own note-taking, and so forth.
Jerry Michalski: I… I…
Jerry Michalski: could have gone back and done that a dozen times, and seen if we got really good at it, or if we developed some practices out of it. I'm interested in those kinds of things. I'm very pleased that this call got a lot of interest from y'all, that people I haven't seen in a while showed up. That's great. But what do you think? Gil?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: … I think I'm not interested in it.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: For the reasons that I asked at the top of the call, after… 83 minutes of this.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I still don't know what we mean by sense, and what we mean by sense-making.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And I think what we're meaning by sense-making is coming to common interpretations about things.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Which is, you know, maybe a useful thing to do, but maybe not. Again, the B deviance.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And Ken's recent comment about how
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: How narrow the scope of this community is.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Raises the question of what, you know, what's the value of sense-making if our, if our senses and our experience and our perceptions are so, well, undiverse, if that's the word?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: How can we make sense of the world that we're in with such a narrow experience of the world that we're in?
Jerry Michalski: And I don't think I saw Ken say that, so… that's news to me.
Jerry Michalski: ….
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Check the chat.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you. There was… there was so much chat that, yeah.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: There's a lot of chat, a couple minutes back.
Jerry Michalski: Yay.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: observation, with the exception of Stacy, everyone on this call is male, all are white, all are highly educated, I think all are over 45.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And all of us use…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: embedded in and acculturated to the social norms of the Global North. So the sense-making that is taking place here is lacking the diversity of gender, ethnicity, and Global South experiences, and thinking this is a tiny sample to explore sense-making with.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I'm sorry.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks for reading that into the recording, I appreciate that as well.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, I think it's an important observation, and it goes to my question about… I… and I don't mean to be the wise guy saying this, Jerry. I mean, it's really clear… true to me in the moment, because that's the kind of sense-making that I'm doing, that I don't know what we're trying to do here.
Jerry Michalski: Which is a question maybe for next week. I'm… I'm… I'm… and I don't wanna….
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: No, I don't mean what we're trying to do with OGM in general. I love what we're doing with OGM in general, whatever the hell it is, and I.
Jerry Michalski: Okay.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: back to this, and I'm pruning my Zoom groups, my calendar, and this one stays.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So that's clear. The, the, …
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Let me tongue-in-cheek call it this obsession with sense-making.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I don't understand that. And I put in the chat a conversation that Ken and I hosted, two years ago, called Stop Making Sense Making.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And invite people to have a look.
Jerry Michalski: ….
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: With homage, of course, to David Byrne.
Jerry Michalski: And, exactly. We have a couple people in the queue, and then possibly a phone from Ken, so we're near the end of our call time. Scott?
Jerry Michalski: You, lowered your hand, but you didn't unmute.
Scott Moehring: I got the sense.
Jerry Michalski: And whenever you… whenever we unmute, if you can keep your hand up while you're talking, that keeps you up in the top near the camera for me, which I like a lot, because the moment you unpin, you go somewhere randomly into my grid, and now I've got to hunt for you, and often you're down below, like, Scott, you're down near the bottom of my screen now, so just as a going forward, if you want to keep your hand up while you… after you unmute, that would be super and great. Go ahead, Scott.
Scott Moehring: Awesome.
Scott Moehring: I got the sense that, like many of our calls, this… the topic of sense-making went to a meta level. It was not actually about making sense, it was about talking about what sense-making was, which I feel is more universal than
Scott Moehring: our individual experiences of making sense. So, when I read Ken's comment, I think.
Scott Moehring: I absolutely agree with that with the sense that is being made, but with the topic of what is collective sense-making and what is that collective intelligence, I think that this is an appropriate curve.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Scott.
Jerry Michalski: Rick.
Rick Botelho: Yeah, just a quick couple of things. One is, you know, there is the Grace Wong Guild that many of you probably know for sense-making. There's also the Institute of General Semantics as well.
Rick Botelho: And where I would overlap with some of Gil's concerns is that
Rick Botelho: You know, you have these academic disciplines, and they go into great depth in defining them, but…
Rick Botelho: they're only one lens, and I think it does help to at least start off with a definition of whatever it is we're talking about, so that I can understand the differences and similarities between how people are framing sense-making, whether it's at a practical level or at a meta level.
Rick Botelho: And I think having that as a grounding, at least then you can critique the… you can say where you differ with the definition, then you can understand where the differences lie, so…
Rick Botelho: That's getting into semantics.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, and I could have begun with a couple definitions, and it might have helped you and Gil, and so forth. So, good point. Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Marc Antoine, was that you with your hand raised that just went down accidentally?
Marc-Antoine Parent: Yes, that was an accident, apologies. Go for it.
Marc-Antoine Parent: It is fascinating how we're…
Marc-Antoine Parent: always arguing about words, because we're always arguing with words. It's a bit… it comes with the territory. That's language for you. …
Marc-Antoine Parent: I…
Marc-Antoine Parent: don't understand, personally, guilt, sorry, I don't understand your frustration with what do we mean by sense, and what do we mean by sense-making, in the sense that
Marc-Antoine Parent: We're busy negotiating it.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And negotiating shared meaning.
Marc-Antoine Parent: So that we can… Have connection at all?
Marc-Antoine Parent: Have communication at all, have shared community, and maybe even act on it at some point.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And learn the praxis of… …
Marc-Antoine Parent: Thinking with others, because for me, it's an essential praxis, like, of learning to listen, learning to see the other perspectives.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And I don't expect
Marc-Antoine Parent: a formal definition of sense-making to emerge or be agreed on. What I do think is
Marc-Antoine Parent: We're here because we have some shared goals.
Marc-Antoine Parent: And… Having some kinds of agreement.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Or some kinds of negotiating meaning and under… and…
Marc-Antoine Parent: Negotiating understanding is part of it. I choose to call that sense-making. That word has obviously offended some of us.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Because they probably attach different meaning to the word, or different connotations.
Marc-Antoine Parent: That's normal. That's always going to happen. We'll always have
Marc-Antoine Parent: dissent over what does the word mean, and this is why I'm saying shared consensus is terrible. The illusion of consensus is terrible. We think we mean the same thing by the same word. We don't. We had a little argument about what do we mean by prediction? We had different
Marc-Antoine Parent: definitions of prediction. It's fine. … and… But, it is very useful
Marc-Antoine Parent: to… and there, I salute your effort, Gil, to step back. What are we trying to accomplish?
Marc-Antoine Parent: But the reality is, again, there won't be a definitive answer. We are each coming with our agenda, we're trying to find
Marc-Antoine Parent: Identify what we're trying to… accomplish in common from our…
Marc-Antoine Parent: existing individual agenda. I say there's no such thing as an individual, not totally true. But all our individual agendas come from a history of collective negotiation also.
Marc-Antoine Parent: … I don't expect…
Marc-Antoine Parent: us to ever agree on a final definition. But I do think it's important to work on the definition progress to see
Marc-Antoine Parent: To explore where the agreement lies.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Over. It's about how much do we want to use words? How much do we want to rely on words?
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Marc Antoine. Someday we should have a call without words. I think that'd be pretty cool.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Especially if we could do it with miming.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, yeah, I think we'll do the Marcel Marceau, call, and everybody needs to come in whiteface and just mind what we say.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Will we do.
Marc-Antoine Parent: Jazz improv.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, we did have a chat and chat about jazz, which is not words, but it's communication and perhaps sense-making.
Jerry Michalski: Oh, totally.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Build on what Marc Antoine was saying, actually.
Jerry Michalski: Go back to it, Ken.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Go kid.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: …
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: A few years ago, I was doing a workshop, at, for the National Park Service at Yosemite on conflict.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And I did not… I'm very suspicious of definitions, because if my definition is different than yours, you're going to disagree with me. So, there were 35 people in the room, we gave everybody a stack of post-its and a marker, and said, please write down all the words and short phrases that come to mind when you think of the word conflict.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And there were over 400 responses that went up on the wall. And we put them… had people arrange them from the least, bothersome to the most bothersome. And under the most bothersome column, someone had written organ failure.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And I said, who wrote organ failure? And someone raised her hand, I said, what does that mean? She said, that's when the conflict is so bad, I'm afraid I'm gonna have a heart attack.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I said, how many people had organ failure in your definition of conflict before? No one really asked. I said, how many have that now? Everybody raised their hand. So…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: to go to Marc Antoine's point, it's not about… this is a difference from sense-making and shared meaning.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: We expanded the shared meaning by allowing everybody to say, this is all the shit I think about when I think about conflict. Not trying to nail it down to a fine definition, but rather, let's get it all out on the table and take a look at it and say, wow, within this group, this is what it means. And if we had a group 10 times the size, there'd be even more, you know? So it…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: becomes expansive and exponentially synthetic, synthesizing, rather than reduced down to a final definition. And I think that's a much more effective way
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: To approach something like this, where we want to get a sense of shared meaning.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Over to you, Alex.
Jerry Michalski: Alex?
Alex Kladitis: Do we have any more time? Because I can skip this.
Jerry Michalski: Go right ahead.
Alex Kladitis: Okay, I'm… I'm just going to contribute in this following way.
Alex Kladitis: I didn't know what sense… the purpose… the purpose, not the meaning, the purpose of what we were doing here.
Alex Kladitis: And, I enjoy the discussion.
Alex Kladitis: But I could not find a thread in it, and can I just say, I'm not academic in the way that I would analyze a prose and know what's going on. Like, whatever, you know, I'm a bit more practical. You say this, you mean that.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: but….
Alex Kladitis: So, I'm not saying what you're doing is wrong, I'm just saying that's what I'm like.
Alex Kladitis: So, listening to everything else, I was not able to say… I cannot say what it is you guys were actually
Alex Kladitis: Yeah, you discuss things, you discuss sense, you discuss make… but I don't know what the outcome… because that's the way I'm oriented. Not because you did anything wrong, it's just I'm oriented to solutionizing.
Alex Kladitis: And there were no solutions here that I could see. It was just discussion about
Alex Kladitis: two words, sense-making, and sometimes sense-making as a third. And I'm not saying this to complain, I'm happy that I was here.
Alex Kladitis: But I didn't identify with it, other than a set of people Talking about what they think
Alex Kladitis: About those three words and the combination of it.
Alex Kladitis: It's not bad, you know, I'm okay, but… but…
Alex Kladitis: for a while, I was lost. I thought, what are we trying to do here? Because I thought there was an objective, but obviously there isn't.
Alex Kladitis: It's a discussion, and I accept that, and I don't have a problem with it.
Alex Kladitis: But I just thought I'd let you know that We're not all the same.
Jerry Michalski: Absolutely. Now, Alex, thank you for that, and we didn't even get to whether sense-making should have a hyphen or not. I mean, we didn't even touch that, which clearly would have sparked another…
Jerry Michalski: Thank you. I think that… I think between what Ken said and what you just said, those are really nice and different, bows to put on the conversation.
Jerry Michalski: Can hast thou a poem?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I do.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: This one's called A Note Passed to Superman by Lucille Clifton.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Sweet Jesus, Superman! If I'd seen you, dressed in your blue suit, I would have known you.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Maybe that choir boy Clark can stand around listening to stories, but not you.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Not with Metropolis to save, and every crooked town filthy with kryptonite.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Lord, Man of Steel, I understand the cape, the leggings, the whole ball of wax. You can trust me. There is no planet stranger than the one I'm from.
Jerry Michalski: Beautiful.
Jerry Michalski: Beautiful, thank you.
Jerry Michalski: And that made perfect sense to everyone in the same way.
Jerry Michalski: Right?
Alex Kladitis: Can I add something just quickly? Last week's poem.
Alex Kladitis: last week's poem was brilliant. I… it touched me. I thought it was the most… one of the most brilliant poems.
Alex Kladitis: I sent it to my wife and kids.
Alex Kladitis: My kids said, great poem.
Alex Kladitis: My wife… my wife said, that's not a perm.
Alex Kladitis: Wow.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Then it did its job. Then it did its job. Can we define poem? Hey, can we define good poem? Oh….
Jerry Michalski: At this point, I wish I had some outro music that was the Twilight Zone closing, but ….
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Here we go.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, everybody. … See y'all in a week!
Jerry Michalski: Bye for now.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Ciao.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And someday we'll make sense of poetry.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Or not.